# JASMIN Workshop: Exercise 05: Batch run a script on LOTUS 


### Scenario

Having established (in exercise 4) that I can extract the total cloud cover ("TCC") variable from a single ERA-Interim file I now wish to extract that data from an entire month.


### Objectives

Write script(s) to batch up separate processes that run CDO to extract the "TCC" variable from a series of ERA-Interim files. Each run of the script will loop through 4 x 6-hourly files for one day. I will run it 30 times, once for each day in September 2018. Each run will be sent to the LOTUS cluster.


### JASMIN resources



*   LOTUS batch processing cluster
*   Space to store the output file: `/group_workspaces/jasmin2/workshop/users/$USER/ex05`
*   Access to the CDO (Climate Data Operators) tool
*   Read-access to the ERA-Interim data set in the CEDA archive - requires a CEDA account


### Local resources



*   SSH client (to login to JASMIN)


### Instructions



1. Start ssh-agent session and add JASMIN private key
2. SSH to a scientific analysis server
3. Write an "`extract-era-data.sh`" wrapper script that calls the CDO extraction command
4. Write a script, called "`submit-all.sh`", to loop over dates from **01**/09/2018 to **02**/09/2018 and submit the "`extract-era-data.sh`" script to LOTUS for each day
5. Run the "`submit-all.sh`" script
6. Examine which jobs are in the queue
7. Examine the standard output and standard error files
8. Modify "`submit-all.sh`" so that it will run for all 30 days in September 2018
9. Re-run the "`submit-all.sh`" script
10. Examine which jobs are in the queue
11. Kill one of the jobs - just to see how it is done


### Review

This exercise demonstrates how to:



*   Create a script that takes an argument to process a single component (day) of an overall task. 
*   Create a wrapper script that loops through all the components that need to be processed.
*   Submit each component as a LOTUS job using the "`bsub`" command.
*   Define the command-line arguments for the "`bsub`" command.
*   Use other LSF commands, such as "`bjobs`" (to monitor progress) and "`bkill`" (to kill jobs).


### Alternative approaches and best practice



*   Build up in stages before running your full workflow on LOTUS
*   Write the output to a "scratch" directory
*   Specify the memory requirements for your job
*   _Have any files been accidentally left on the system? (E.g. in <code>/tmp/</code>)</em>


# Cheat sheet for Exercise 05: Batch run a script on LOTUS 



1. Start ssh-agent session and add JASMIN private key

##### 
    exec ssh-agent $SHELL


##### 
    ssh-add ~/.ssh/id_rsa_jasmin

2. SSH to a scientific analysis server

##### 
    ssh -A <username>@jasmin-login1.ceda.ac.uk


##### 
    ssh jasmin-sci5 # Could use sci[123456]

3. Write an "`extract-era-data.sh`" wrapper script that calls the CDO extraction command, that:
    1. Takes a date string ("`YYYYMMDD`") as a command-line argument
    2. Locates the 4 x 6-hourly input file paths for the date provided
    3. Activates environment containing the CDO tool
    4. For each 6-hourly file:
        1. Defines the output file path
        2. Run the CDO tool to extract the "`TCC`" variable from the input file to the output file
    5. If you are stuck, you can use the script located at:

        ```
        /group_workspaces/jasmin2/workshop/exercises/ex05/code/extract-era-data.sh 
        ```



        [ Source: [https://github.com/cedadev/jasmin-workshop/blob/master/exercises/ex05/code/extract-era-data.sh](https://github.com/cedadev/jasmin-workshop/blob/master/exercises/ex05/code/extract-era-data.sh) ]

4. Write a script, called "`submit-all.sh`", to loop over dates from 01/09/2018 to 02/09/2018 and submit the "`extract-era-data.sh`" script to LOTUS for each day:
    6. You will need to define the following LOTUS directives:
        3. Standard output file - please ensure this is unique to each job by including the "`%J`" variable in the file name.
        4. Standard error file - please ensure this is unique to each job by including the "`%J`" variable in the file name.
        5. Queue name:
            1. During the workshop you can use queue: "`workshop`"
            2. Default queue for new users: "`new_users`"
            3. Default queue for established users: "`short-serial`"
        6. Job duration - to allocate a maximum run-time to the job, e.g.: "`00:05`"
    7. The Help page on submitting LOTUS jobs is here:

        [https://help.jasmin.ac.uk/article/113-submit-jobs](https://help.jasmin.ac.uk/article/113-submit-jobs)

    8. And use the "`bsub`" command to submit each job.
    9. If you need some advice you can use the script at:

        ```
        /group_workspaces/jasmin2/workshop/exercises/ex05/code/submit-all.sh 
        ```



        [ Source: [https://github.com/cedadev/jasmin-workshop/blob/master/exercises/ex05/code/submit-all.sh](https://github.com/cedadev/jasmin-workshop/blob/master/exercises/ex05/code/submit-all.sh) ]

5. Run the "`submit-all.sh`" script
6. Examine which jobs are in the queue
    10. Type "`bjobs`" to review any running jobs.
7. Examine the standard output and standard error files.
8. If you are happy the job is doing the right thing, now modify "`submit-all.sh`" so that it will run for all 30 days in September 2018.
9. Re-run the "`submit-all.sh`" script.
10. Examine which jobs are in the queue
11. Kill one of the jobs - just to see how it is done:
    11. Use the "`bkill`" command:

##### 
        bkill <job_id>



### Alternative approaches and best practice



*   Build up in stages before running your full workflow on LOTUS:
    *   This is really good practice!
        *   1. Check your code - is it _really_ doing what you think it is doing?
        *   2. Run locally (on a "sci" server) for one iteration.
        *   3. Run for one or two iterations on LOTUS.
        *   4. Check everything ran correctly on LOTUS.
        *   5. Submit your full batch of jobs to LOTUS.
*   Write the output to a "`scratch`" directory.
    *   There are two main scenarios in which you might write the output to a scratch directory:
        *   1. You only need to store the output file for temporary use (such as intermediate files in your workflow).
        *   2. You want to write outputs to scratch before moving them to a GWS.
    *   The Help page ([https://help.jasmin.ac.uk/article/176-storage#diskmount](https://help.jasmin.ac.uk/article/176-storage#diskmount)) tells us that there are two types of scratch space:
        *   `/work/scratch` – supports parallel writes
        *   `/work/scratch-nompiio` – does NOT support parallel writes
    *   Since we do not need parallel write capability, we can use the "`nonmpiio`" version.
    *   You need to set up a directory under "`/work/scratch-nompiio"` as your username:

##### 
        MYSCRATCH=/work/scratch-nompiio/$USER


##### 
        mkdir -p $MYSCRATCH

    *   Then you would write output files/directories under your scratch space, e.g.:

##### 
        OUTPUT_FILE=$MYSCRATCH/output.nc


##### 
        ...some_process... > $OUTPUT_FILE

    *   When you have finished with the file, tidy up (good practice).

##### 
        rm $OUTPUT_FILE

    *   Do not leave data on the "scratch" areas when you have finished your workflow.
        *   Please remove any temporary files/directories that you have created.
        *   You cannot rely on the data persisting in the "scratch" areas.
*   Specify the memory requirements of your job:
    *   If your job has a significant memory footprint:
        *   Run a single iteration on LOTUS and review the standard output file to examine the memory usage.
        *   You can then reserve a memory allocation when you submit your subsequent jobs.
        *   See help pages:

            [https://help.jasmin.ac.uk/article/115-how-to-estimate-job-resources](https://help.jasmin.ac.uk/article/115-how-to-estimate-job-resources)


            [https://help.jasmin.ac.uk/article/112-how-to-allocate-resources#memcontrol](https://help.jasmin.ac.uk/article/112-how-to-allocate-resources#memcontrol)

*   _Have any files been accidentally left on the system? (E.g. in <code>/tmp/</code>)</em>
    *   It is important to clean up any temporary files that you no longer need. 
    *   Please check whether the tools you use have left any files in "<code>/tmp/</code>".


