# JASMIN Workshop: Exercise 07: Build your own python 3 environment


### Scenario

I need to use a Python 3 environment for my analysis work. I have seen that CEDA has Python 3 available in its "Jaspy" environment but I need a specific package called "fixnc" (fix netCDF files).


### Objectives

I want to build my own Python 3 environment on top of the Jaspy environment and then install "`fixnc`" into it. I can use the "`venv`" module to create my own virtual environment and install new packages into that.


### JASMIN resources



*   A scientific analysis server
*   Access to my `$HOME` directory to install the environment
*   Access to the Python 3 ("Jaspy") environment on JASMIN.


### Local resources



*   SSH client (to login to JASMIN)


### Instructions



1. Start ssh-agent session and add JASMIN private key
2. SSH to a scientific analysis server
3. Activate the Jaspy Python 3 environment with the "`module`" command
4. Create a Python 3 virtual environment in your` $HOME` directory
5. Activate the virtual environment
6. Pip install the "`fixnc`" package from the PyPI remote repository
7. Test that the package can be imported in a python session
8. Deactivate the virtual environment and test the import again
9. Write a setup script ("`~/setup-workshop-env.sh`") so that you can activate the virtual environment in a single line each time you login
10. Now whenever you login you can run "`source ~/setup-workshop-env.sh`" and your own Python 3 environment will be enabled


### Review

This exercise demonstrates how to:



*   Activate the default Jaspy Python environment on JASMIN
*   Create a Python 3 "virtual environment"
*   Install additional packages into your virtual environment
*   Create a setup script for activating your virtual environment when you login


### Alternative approaches and best practice



*   Sharing your environment with others
*   Set up virtual environment without "system site packages"


# Cheat sheet for Exercise 07: Build your own python 3 environment 



1. Start ssh-agent session and add JASMIN private key

##### 
    exec ssh-agent $SHELL


##### 
    ssh-add ~/.ssh/id_rsa_jasmin

2. SSH to a scientific analysis server

##### 
    ssh -A <username>@jasmin-login1.ceda.ac.uk


##### 
    ssh jasmin-sci5 # Could use any of sci[123456]

3. Activate the Jaspy Python 3 environment with the "`module`" command

##### 
    module load jaspy

4. Create a Python 3 virtual environment in your` $HOME` directory

##### 
    python -m venv ~/my-workshop-venv --system-site-packages

5. Activate the virtual environment

##### 
    source ~/my-workshop-venv/bin/activate

6. Pip install the "`fixnc`" package from the PyPI remote repository

##### 
    pip install fixnc

7. Test that the package can be imported in a python session

##### 
    python -c 'import fixnc; print(dir(fixnc))'

8. Deactivate the virtual environment and test the import again

##### 
    deactivate                 # Deactivates the virtual environment


##### 
    python -c 'import fixnc'   # Now fails to import because cannot find "fixnc"


##### 
    Traceback (most recent call last):


##### 
      File "<string>", line 1, in <module>


##### 
    ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'fixnc'

9. Write a setup script ("`~/setup-workshop-env.sh`") so that you can activate the virtual environment in a single line each time you login

##### 
    echo "module load jaspy" > ~/setup-workshop-env.sh


##### 
    echo "source ~/my-workshop-venv/bin/activate" >> `~/setup-workshop-env.sh`

10. Now whenever you login you can run "`source ~/setup-workshop-env.sh`" and your own Python 3 environment will be enabled.


### 


### Alternative approaches and best practice



*   Sharing your environment with others:
    *   If you need to create your own environment it is important to be aware of which file system you are working on:
        *   SOF (e.g. "`/gws/nopw/j04`"): does not perform well with small files at present.
        *   SSD (e.g. "`$HOME`" and "`/gws/smf/j04`"): performs much better with small files.
    *   If you are building an environment for your use only then it makes sense to create it under your `$HOME` directory.
    *   If you need to share an environment with other JASMIN users you can:
        *   Request a "small files" Group Workspace (GWS).
        *   Install the software environment within the "small files" GWS.
        *   Then all users with access to that GWS will be able to access the environment.
*   Request that your software dependencies are added to the common Python 3 "Jaspy" environment on JASMIN:
    *   See more details at:

    [https://help.jasmin.ac.uk/article/4729-jaspy-envs-py3-rhel6-rhel7#request-updates](https://help.jasmin.ac.uk/article/4729-jaspy-envs-py3-rhel6-rhel7#request-updates)

*   Set up virtual environment without "system site packages":
    *   We called the "`venv`" module with this argument: `--system-site-packages`
    *   That means that all the packages in the base Jaspy Python 3 environment are available in the virtual environment.
    *   However, you might prefer to only keep the core Python 3 packages. If that is the case then simply remove the "`--system-site-packages`" flag.


